---
title: Introduction to logging for security purposes
description: Laying the groundwork for incident readiness.
published: true
date: 2021-02-21T03:22:50.683Z
tags: security operations, bronze, bronze-training
editor: markdown
dateCreated: 2021-02-21T03:22:50.683Z
---

# Introduction
Logging is the foundation on which security monitoring and situational awareness are built.

This guidance will help you devise an approach to logging that will help answer some of the typical questions asked during a cyber incident, such as:

- What has happened?
- What is the impact?
- What should we do next?
- Has any post-incident remediation been effective?
- Are our security controls working?

If you can answer these questions, even partially, it will help you to recover quickly from a cyber incident and develop your defences. This will reassure your customers, suppliers, investors and regulators that you have taken all measures necessary to protect your data and systems.

In later guidance, the logging approach we design here will form the basis of a more richly featured capability, geared towards detecting attacks as they happen.

# Audience
This guidance is for you if:

- Your organisation currently has little or no logging capability OR You would like to assess the suitability of your current logging capability
- You would like to be better prepared for a cyber incident
- You want to understand the NCSC’s expectations regarding basic good practice for logging

# Steps to Implementation
This guidance proposes a four step program for putting in place a simple but effective logging capability.

You will learn how to:

- A. Choose which logs to generate or retain: What questions do you need to answer?
- B. Decide how to retain logs
- C. Implement log storage and tooling for analysis
- D. Validate that your logging capability is working as intended

## A. Choose which logs to generate or retain: What questions do you need to answer?

Your first step is to generate a list of logs that could be used to determine whether your organisation’s IT has been compromised, and to what extent.

In the table below we've listed the common questions you're likely to be asked during the initial phases of a cyber incident. Working through these will help to focus your efforts and guide next steps.

### Accessing logs
If you outsource much of your IT, as many UK public sector bodies do, it can be difficult to access logging data without making unforeseen demands on your suppliers. The table below is configured to help with this situation, giving you some flexibility in how you obtain your logging data.

For example, there are several ways to collect web browsing activity - through a web proxy, host-based agent or (in a limited form) from DNS. If one source is providing contractually difficult to obtain, try another. There are often many ways to capture the data you need.

### Using the table
Work out which logs would give you visibility of the categories listed in the first column, and help to answer the questions in the second column. Identify where the relevant logs are generated, how, and for how long they are stored and secured.

This table covers the highest priority categories and questions, but is not an exhaustive list. You may identify other helpful data you can bring in to augment your overall picture.

You might be able to answer the questions without using the event sources listed - this is fine. Your answers, and how you find them, will depend on your unique architecture and technology choices.

### Host-based logs
Host-based logs can include those already generated by applications and operating systems, as well as more detailed events captured by host-based agents.

### Table 1: External network communications (and host based logging)
Visibility of communication between your network and other networks (i.e. the internet or 3rd party suppliers).

This information allows you to determine if an Indicator of Compromise has been seen on your systems.

